---
title: Rumbo al AZ-900 [En inglés]
date: 2021-01-02
---


- [Storage](#storage)
  - [Cosmos DB](#cosmos-db)
  - [Azure SQL Database](#azure-sql-database)
  - [Azure for MySQL](#azure-for-mysql)
  - [Azure fo PostgreSQL](#azure-fo-postgresql)
  - [Azure for data analytics](#azure-for-data-analytics)
  - [Azure Synapse](#azure-synapse)
- [Compute](#compute)
  - [Virtual machines](#virtual-machines)
    - [Azure Batch](#azure-batch)
    - [Virtual machine scale sets](#virtual-machine-scale-sets)
  - [Containers and Kubernetes](#containers-and-kubernetes)
  - [App Service](#app-service)
  - [Functions](#functions)
  - [Logic Apps](#logic-apps)
- [Azure Storage types](#azure-storage-types)
    - [Redundancy](#redundancy)
  - [Blob storage](#blob-storage)
  - [Azure files](#azure-files)
- [Virtual Network Fundamentals](#virtual-network-fundamentals)
  - [VPN Gateways](#vpn-gateways)
  - [Route network traffic](#route-network-traffic)
  - [Filter Network traffic](#filter-network-traffic)

# Storage
## Cosmos DB

Cosmos DB is one of many Azure's storage services, by definition its a gobally distributed << to achieve low latency and high availability by sharing the same database across regions byy replicating the data of the database across regions>>, multi model database service, << meaning it has many ways to organize and manipulate the data all the while having a united backend. Cosmos also supports schema-less databases, like those seen in a JSON >> 

Azure Cosmos DB stores data in atom-record-sequence (ARS) format << this means that everything gets stored as primitive value types and then gets translated back whenever cosmos does queries>>. The data is then abstracted and projected as an API, which you specify when you're creating your database including: SQL, MongoDB, Cassandra, Tables, and Gremlin. 

## Azure SQL Database

Azure SQL is a relational database based on MS SQL Server. As a PaaS, Azure SQL performs functions related to the maintenance of the database automatically, like upgrading, doing backups, monitoring, etc. The cool thing about this service is that is capable to process non relational structures like graphs, JSON and XML. 

While configuring a new SQL database we can add an elastic pool, another service that manages multiple compute resources so the database can expand on demand withing configurable limits to avoid unwanted cost.
We can also configure the way we connect to the server either via a public IP with the respective firewall rules or via or private endpoints within a virtual network.

## Azure for MySQL

This is just Azure's flavored version of the traditional mySQL, specifically the Community Edition. The advantage of this is that it no longer requires administration and no additional cost. One of the importante features of this service is the capability to migrate the database easily from MySQL to Azure using the Azure Database Migration Service and after that we can still use the same method of DB management we want.

It offers different tiers, based on performance and capabilities. This service offers the same features that all of the database management services in Azure, like scalability and elasticity.

## Azure fo PostgreSQL

This one is like the MySQL service but based on other DBMS except for the deployment part, in this service we can deploy in two ways:
- As a single server, where we can choose between three pricing tiers, Basic, General Purpose and Memory Optimized. 
- As a hyperscale service, where we can setup multiple machines that Postsgre's query engine is going to parallelize for faster response on large datasets, talking of DB's above 100 GBs of data.

## Azure for data analytics
Azure has a big catalogue of services for data analysis and hadling 
## Azure Synapse

This service allows is specialized on data warehousing and big data, it can handle raw and refined and highly curated. The main purpose of this service is to centralize querying across databases. 


# Compute
One of the main uses for Azure are the compute services, basically we are renting an Azure machine over the cloud on demand, it provides many resources, mmaybe if we need computing power, or we need a networking solution, maybe we need to run a specific operating system. The best part is that you only pay for the resources that you use. The most important resources of the many compute services available at Azure are Virtual machines, container instances, Azure Functions and Azure app service.




## Virtual machines

These are just like any other virtual machine, they have their own processor, memory, storage and networking resources. As many other VM services, they are very useful when you need complete control over the enviroment, meaning that you can manage anything you want, starting from the operating system. This is specially usefull when you're running custom software or custom hosting configurations.

This service is ideal when you want to take care of everything in the same way as you do with a physical computer. you can customize all of the software running on the VM. In this service you still need to configure, update and maintain the software running on the VM. Azure offers multiple pre configured VMs with multiple types of images depending on the use case.

VMs are ideal when you want to:
- Quickly create multiple test enviroments with different OS and app configurations
- When running apps in the cloud. 
- When extending the datacenter to the cloud. 
- Disaster recovery, when your on-prem machines fail, you can levarage this service to run all of your apps on.

Its important to keep in mind that when using this service, **you need to maintain the VM** just like an on-prem server, so updating and installing software is your responsability.

### Azure Batch

This is and option that Azure VMs have, we can set large-scale paralled computing batch jobs, with the ability to scale to tens, hundreds or thousand of VMs. This special service its useful when you need a lot of compute power in a little amount of time.

### Virtual machine scale sets

This service consists of a managed cluster of many virtual machines, just like replicant machines, all with the same configuration. This service is designed specifically for autoscaling. As demand goes up, more VMs can be added, and visceversa. The process can be manual or automated. 

The main advantage is that we don't need to explicitly create a connection between the group of VMs, going trough the whole routing process is taken care of by Azure. The number of VM instances can automatically increase or decrease in response to demand or a defined schedule.

## Containers and Kubernetes

Containers are used when you want to separate each service of you app in many defined tasks, each task is capable of running its own architecture, lenguage and in some cases it is recommended that they have their own managed DB. 

Azure is also capable of deploying and managing containers, these are different from VMs in the way that the OS and Kernel is distributed. When talking about VMs, all of the machines runs above the OS of the "hosting" computer and then they have their own OS on top. With containers we have indivitual instances of computing resources, with completely separated enviroments starting from the kernel.

Another difference is that VMs are limited to a single OS per VM. 

- VMs virtualize the physical resources, like RAM, Processor, etc. 
- Containers virtualize the OS 

We can manage multiple containers with an orchestrator like Kubernetes or with an Azure service called Container Instance. 

Whith container instances we have a way to run a container in azure without having to manage any virtual machine or additional services. With Azure Kubernetes is a complete orchestration service for container with distributed architectures and large volumes of containers.

## App Service

With this service you can deploy a web, mobile or API quickly and running on any platform. You can meet rigorous performance using a fully managed platform to perform infrastructure maintenance. This is the main PaaS that Azure Offers.

App service is super useful when you want to build and host web apps, background jobs, mobile back-ends and REST APIs in the programming lenguage of your choice without having to manage infrastructure. This service can pull the code directly from any git repository to support a continous deployment model.
This service lets you run, Web apps, API apps, WebJobs and Mobile apps.

App service handles most of the infrastructure decisions that you have to deal when hosting web-accessible apps, like deploying and management, endpoint security, scalability, load balancing and traffic management.
## Functions

This is another compute service, here you let Azure take care of most of the tasks, this service is ideal when you only want to take care of the code running. This service is commonly used when you need to perform work in response to an event, timer or a message.

This service is specially useful when you have an appication that runs when another event happens, because with functions, the resources only work when you perform the task, without having to spend money in an idle machine that only waits until getting input. This is the main serverless solution for Azure and is convinient when you have low traffic on a page.

## Logic Apps

This service is for execute workflows designed to automate business scenarios based on prebuilt logic blocks. This workflow is triggered by an event or in an Scheduled way. Logic Apps is also a great tool for low code workflows, because we are going to run everything in a GUI enviroment. 



The main difference of  logic apps and functions are: functions are most of the time, stateless and Logic Apps are always Stateful, the development with Logic Apps is declarative, tailored for a designer-first approach. Also, Logic Apps only run on the cloud, and functions can run on prem or on cloud.


# Azure Storage types

In Azure we need to create an Azure Storage account for any operations that will require memory, for example, when we are going to use the Azure Command Line we need to create a storage account to operate. In a storage account we are going to save all of the data objects, blobs, files, queues, tables and disks.
The Azure Storage account provides a namespace for our data so it can be accesible via HTTP or HTTPS. 

Azure Storage offers several types of storage, with different pricing:
- General Purpose v2 => this are recommended for most situations
- General Purpose v1 => The legacy version of the general accounts, recommended to migrate to a v2. Upgrading is easy and it causes no downtime and you don't need to copy your data
- BlockBlobStorage => Storage accounts with premium characteristics, recommended for high transaction rate scenarios or when we need low latency
- FileStorage => Only for saving files, recommended for enterprise or high performance applications
- BlobStorage => Legacy blob-only storage accounts. Use general-purpose v2 accounts instead when possible

### Redundancy 
Each storage account type has it own redundancy type assigned to it:
- Locally redundant storage (LRS) => this type has data copied synchronously three times within a single physical location within the primary region.
- Zone-redundant storage (ZRS) => this type has data copied synchronously across three azure availabilty zones in the primary region, recommended for scenarios where high availabilty is required
- Geo-redundant storage (GRS) => Redundancy across regions, data is copied three times in the primary region then its copied to the secondary region
- Geo-zone-redundant storage (GZRS) => Here data is copied synchronously across three Azure availability zones in the primary region, then its copied to the secondary region, recommended in scenarios where high availability and maximum durability is required.

## Blob storage


Azure blob storage is a our main type of storage solution, it doesn't have restrictions to the type of data we can save here. It can handle simultaneous uploads and can be reached from anywhere. This type of storage is ideal for serving images or documents directly to a browser, storing files for distributed access, streaming video and audio, storing backups, etc. Blobs can be organized in containers. **Ideal for storing disaster recovery files**

## Azure files
Its a fully managed file share system via SMB (Server Message Block), applications running on VMs or cloud services can access this services just like any other SMB share system. It allows for any number of access anywhere from the world, diagnostic data or app data sharing.

Azure Storage offers different access tiers for your blob storage, helping you store object data in the most cost-effective manner. 
The available access tiers include:

- Hot access tier => Optimized for storing data that is accessed frequently (for example, images for your website).
- Cool access tier => Optimized for data that is infrequently accessed and stored for at least 30 days (for example, invoices for your customers).
- Archive access tier => Appropriate for data that is rarely accessed and stored for at least 180 days, with flexible latency requirements (for example, long-term backups).

Keep in mind that only the hot and cold type can be set at the account level, the archive access tier isn't available at account level. 

In order to share an image files a a blob in azure storage we first need to creat a storage account


# Virtual Network Fundamentals

Azure virtual networks enable Azure resources to communicate to each other and to the internet. With virtual networks are a set of resources that links other resources with each other.
It provides multiple capabilities.

To create one Vnet we need to specify: 
- Network name, it must be unique within the subscription. 
- Adress space, defined in CIDR notation, unique within the subscription and any other networks that we want to connect.
- Subnet, we can create one or more subnets that partition the virtual network's address space.
- DDoS protection, we can select basic or standard protection
- Service endpoints, we can enable it or disable it
- Basic azure stuff like location, subscription and resource group

We can create multiple isolated virtual networks, with a defined private IP using public or private IP adress ranges. We can divide the IP adress space into subnets and allocate part of the adress space to each subnet.

Azure can enable incoming connections from the internet by defining a public IP address or a public load balancer. 

We can enable resources to communicate to each other using virtual networks to connect to compute resources or via service endpoints to communicate to other azure services.

## VPN Gateways

We can enable resources to communicate to on premises enviroments creating a network that spans both the on prem and the cloud enviroment. To provide the connectivity we can use point to site VPNs to create an ecrypted VPN connection to azure from a virtual network. 
We can use site-to-site VPNs to link site so they appear as being on the same local networks, this connection is encrypted and works over the internet.

VPN uses an encrypted tunnel within another network, azure VPN gateways is a type of Vnet gateway deployed in a specialized instance. It is possible to deploy only one VPN gateway in each virtual network, but using one gateway to connect to multiple locations. 
We can specify the type of VPN that we are going to use, policy based or route based. The difference is how traffic is going to be encrypted is going to be specified. In both we can use a key as the only method of authentication. Both types also rely on Internet Key Exchange and IPSec. 

Policy based VPNs specify the IP adress range of packets that should be encrypted through each tunnel, evaluating each data packet against a set of IP adresses to choose the tunnel where that packet is going to be sent through.  

Route based VPNs uses modeled IPSec tunnels as a network interface or virtual tunnel interface. IP routing decides which one of these tunnel interfaces to use when sending each packet, 




Another way to do this is via Azure ExpressRoute, a service that offers higher bandwidth and security providing a private connectivity that doesn't travel over the internet.

## Route network traffic
We can control routing via traditional route tables, to define rules about how traffic should be directed, we can create custom route tables to control how traffic should be directed. We can also use the Border Gateway Protocol to propagate on prem BGP routes to azure VNets.

## Filter Network traffic

We can define security groups to contain multiple inbound and outbound security rules to allow or block traffic based on source and destination IP address, port and even protocol. Another way to filter traffic is via a specialized VM called a virtual appliance where we can run a firewall or perform WAN optimization.

